---
published: false
layout: post
title: NTSE 2015
categories: ntse school
---
> **DISCLAIMER:** This post was composed 3 years back so might not be completely accurate but I figured I might just publish it.

The results for the second stage of NTSE 2014-15 just came out, and I got through (#humblebrag). So, this is going to be a long post about the prestigious exam, necessary details, how to prepare for it, and most importantly, how to attempt the paper.

For the uninitiated, this is what Wikipedia has to say about NTSE:

> National Talent Search Examination (NTSE) is a national-level scholarship program in the Indian Union to identify and recognize students with high intellect and academic talent. It is one of the most prestigious exams in India. Close to 300,000 students (a largely self selective group of students) appear in this scholarship exam every year, and 1,000 scholarships are awarded, out of which 775 are not reserved. The scheme is open to students of Indian nationality. Students studying in Class X are eligible to appear for the selection process. As it is organized by an official body (NCERT), it is widely regarded by the Government of India as the most prestigious and the most difficult examination at secondary level in the country.

In a nutshell, it's one of the most important examination for high-school students in India, and contrary to popular belief, is actually easy to crack.

##Details

The examination is conducted in two stages:

    Stage I (At a State or UT level)
    Stage II (At the National level)

The Stage I examination is conducted by the respective States or Union Territories, and the paper pattern, number of seats, cutoff et cetera, all vary from region to region. The selected candidates from each State then appear for the Stage II examination: a common paper conducted at the National Level by NCERT. The number of seats are fixed for each category (General, SC, ST) and there is no quota for any State in the Stage II exam.

Registrations for the 2015-16 session are hopefully done by now. Nonetheless, the official advertisement issued by NCERT can be found here. It lists all necessary details including the date of examination. For FAQ, one can go through this. It answers most of the questions one can have about it. Also, a sample paper can be found here. All these documents are official ones, since they are issued by NCERT, and can be used as a reference.

##Preparation

Preparation for NTSE doesn't require putting in long hours or going through book after book. All you need are the NCERT books of classes IX and X. Simply go through them well. Especially for Social Studies, the NCERT books are your best friends. Apart from that, if you feel that you have enough command over the basics, you could try the NTSE package offered by Tata-McGraw Hill Publications. It can be found here. It gives a summary of each and every chapter, followed by plenty of Multiple Choice Questions. The Biology section of the book is quite elaborate, and may require a teacher and/or a class XI Biology textbook.

Other than that, I would recommend joining a Test series, such as the one offered by FIITJEE. The tests are held throughout the year and cover the entire syllabus. Such test series give necessary practice, and also give an estimate to where you stand, at a national level.

##Examination

Perhaps the single post subtopic: How to attempt the question paper. I'll go according to the stages.

###Stage I

The Stage I exam is of 140 marks. (There is also the language paper of 40 marks, but it is merely of a qualifying nature.) The paper is set by each State or UT and this the cutoff varies from place to place. In Delhi, for example, which is quite fiercely competed, the cutoff last time was 120. In most places the cutoff is around the same, or a bit lesser.

Scoring 120 is no big deal. The aim instead should be for scoring 130+ and which is achievable indeed. I can speak only about the UP paper, so proceed taking that into mind.

The Language paper is quite easy, and requires almost nil preparation, except if you are very poor at it. Then practice a bit for MCQ, and you can easily clear the cutoff.

The MAT paper is a breeze. Short and simple. It is for 50 marks and it is quite easy to score full marks (I scored 48, due to silly errors.)It wouldn't take much time, and the questions are mostly basic MAT questions, that one can find everywhere.

The SAT paper is the main test. The Mathematics section again is a breeze. Very elementary questions, and again should score full here (I did). It doesn't consume much time either, and each question takes only a few seconds at max. The Science section is fine. It is a bit conceptual, but all those are covered in the NCERT textbooks. Make sure to prepare well for this. It is quite scoring as well. Then comes the bomb of the sections. The one feared by almost every aspirant: Social Studies. What creates a bigger problem, is that the UP paper is based on the books for classes VI, VII and VIII. Thus, one need to go through those thoroughly. The books contain sufficient knowledge to help you score well in this section too. However, reading the book well, and then recalling the facts is a must, and a tough job.  If you done the rest of the paper well, you can be a bit relaxed here. If you aren't good at SSt (like me), you can easily make 5-7 mistakes, and still hope for ~130, IF you have done the other sections nearly perfectly, making minimum errors (~5). As per the answer key provided by FIITJEE, I scored 122 out of 140. The cutoff was ~118. I was clear of the cutoff, but not by a huge margin, primarily due to errors in SSt (13). Avoid those, and you can easily ace the first hurdle.

###Stage II

Kudos! You made it to the second stage, and are about to face your most important examination until now (No, the Class X exams weren't that important).  Most of the candidates know how to solve the complete paper. It is only how they attempt it is what differentiates them (d/dx).

The minimum requirement for even being considered for the overall cutoff, is 40% marks in each paper. This is probably the most important condition, and what causes many to fail every year. This effectively means:

    ≥ 20 in Language and MAT each (Out of 50)
    ≥ 40 in SAT (Out of 100)

However,  it is not as easy as it seems. The paper also has negative marking. +1 for each correct answer, but a -1/3 for every incorrect answer. This is a big change from the first stage, and limits the possibility of "guessing". Let us again go through the exam paper-wise:

The Language paper is yet again easy, and most people score >40 out of 50. No worries here, unless of course, you aren't to comfortable with any of the languages (Hindi or English). Then you need to practice beforehand.

The MAT paper is tricky. Very tricky indeed. It is the deciding factor and can make or break your paper. For the past two years, the paper has been very tough: Lengthy, long paragraphs-based questions, hidden and obscure patterns and everything else that makes it one of the toughest MAT paper to attempt within an hour. Most students fail at this hurdle. They fail to score more than 20 marks. We don't want that. Solve the paper smartly. Select the questions you think you can solve, FAST. That's more important. You may solve a difficult question in 5 minutes, but that could prevent you from reading an easy paragraph that could have yielded you 2 more marks in lesser time. DON'T, at any cost, attempt the paper in order. Be extremely selective and maintain your pace throughout. Try to attempt around 30-35 questions. That was the average for most selected students. If you can do that and luck is in your favor (to identify those patterns), you can score more than 25 here. I myself, attempted 34 questions and got 3 wrong, coming back down to 30. (I also attempted an extra question, unwittingly, while marking the answer for another question. That brought my score down 0.33 more. Avoid that too.) Try to keep filling the bubbles side-by-side, as you solve the question.

The SAT paper is comparatively easy. However, here too, one will definitely feel a shortage f time to attempt each and every question well. the Science is again quite conceptual and not that hard. The Maths too is based on basic concepts, but involve some tedious calculations and multiple concepts in a single question. It can be time taking, and can also be distressing at the end, which is exactly what happened with me. The SSt, at least this time, was easy, even by MY standards. The questions were mostly assertion-reasoning and matrix-match type, strictly based on the class IX and X syllabus. What is important that you do not spend too much time on each paper. If you attempt each section, even moderately well, you should easily be able to score 60-70 marks. This, along with around 2025 marks from the SAT paper would keep you safe, but you need to excel somewhere in one paper to push that score up and guarantee your selection. What my grave mistake with the SAT paper was that I started with SSt, spending way too much time on it, and then attempting Maths at the end. In that end-moment scramble, I solved very few questions, made quite a few errors (marking radius instead of diameter etc.), and thus completely screwed up the Maths section. Avoid that at all costs. Don't mess up any section. But if you do, try your best compensate for it in the other sections.

In total, I scored 77.77 (Due to the horrendous SAT paper), but still got qualified. Why? Because I cleared the 40% cutoff and the overall cutoff was 75 (phew!). If you don't make such errors, you can easily score more than 85, as most of my peers did, even after a moderate MAT paper. Last year, there was no cutoff; anyone who scored more than 40% in each paper was selected. This year also, most important was the 40% cutoff, and most of the people who cleared that got through. So, the primary focus should be to score at least the minimum cutoff, and then aim for the overall cutoff.

In conclusion, I hope that I've covered the A-Z of NTSE. Still, if I find something being missing, I'll try to add it later. If you have queries you can ask them in the comments, and I'll try my best to answer them. Hope this guide helps you. Peace.
